# Interests


#### Music

Music, in almost any form, brings me joy. But I'm especially drawn to the
spontaneous creativity of improvisational music, particularly jazz and Indian
classical. I'm also actively learning [Carnatic
music](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carnatic_music) on the guitar and
mandolin, though I'm still very much a beginner.


While I grew up listening to music, I did not formally learn until my college
days.  My initial steps were on the violin, guided by Ms. Sowmya (a student of
Kanyakumari), I found my true passion in fretted instruments. Under the
tutelage of Guru Shrinidhi Hemmige, I explored the intricacies of Carnatic
guitar, fueled by the captivating sounds of Mandolin U Srinivas and Guitar R
Prasanna, whose artistry continues to inspire me.

I own several electric guitars and an electric 4-string mandolin.

#### Keyboards

Keyboards have held a special fascination for me, particularly as a heavy
computer user. My journey began with a Kinesis Freestyle, mounted vertically to
prioritize wrist comfort. This quickly grew into a genuine passion for
collecting and using a variety of keyboards, even dabbling in custom builds. My
daily driver is the Kinesis Advantage. Though I also own the newer Kinesis 360,
finding myself still drawn to the classic Advantage 2. My collection include
over a dozen split, ergonomic keyboards, including a custom Dactyl designed to
perfectly fit my finger lengths, reflecting my dedication to finding the
perfect typing experience.

![Kinesis Advantage 2 with Trackball](/images/keyb.png)


A few years ago, I decided to transition to the Colemak keyboard layout. The
initial weeks and months were demanding, but the effort has paid off, as I am
now comfortably "multi-layout fluent." I maintain typing speeds well over 100
words per minute on both Colemak and the standard QWERTY layout. For a quick
mental break, I often turn to typing games, finding them a fun and engaging way
to sharpen my skills and refresh my mind.


#### Coffee

![Traditional Indian filter](/images/kaapi.jpg)

I enjoy a good cup of coffee, and I've even taken some beginner barista
training to learn more about the process. My kitchen has a few different kinds
of brewing equipment, and I tend to prefer lighter roasts from Central America
when I drink it black. When I add milk, I like darker roasts from the Coorg or
Chikmagalur regions of India.  Perhaps this love is inherited; my
great-grandmother ran a renowned coffee stop, opening her doors at 4:30 am to
serve piping hot filter coffee to eager travelers.

